docs: Polaris Admin Tool (#830)
apache/polaris: site/content/in-dev/unreleased/admin-tool.md

configuration can be done via environment variables or system properties.

At a minimum, it is necessary to configure the Polaris Admin Tool to connect to the same database
used by the Polaris server. This can be done by setting the following system properties:

```shell
java -jar quarkus/admin/build/polaris-quarkus-admin-*-runner.jar \
    -Dpolaris.persistence.eclipselink.configuration-file=/path/to/persistence.xml
    -Dpolaris.persistence.eclipselink.persistence-unit=polaris
```

See the [metastore documentation]({{% ref "metastores" %}}) for more information on configuring the
database connection.

## Bootstrapping Principal Credentials

The `bootstrap` command is used to bootstrap realms and create the necessary principal credentials for the Polaris
server. This command is idempotent and can be run multiple times without causing any issues.

```shell
java -jar quarkus/admin/build/polaris-quarkus-admin-*-runner.jar bootstrap --help
```

The basic usage of the `bootstrap` command is outlined below:

```
Usage: polaris-quarkus-admin-runner.jar bootstrap [-hV] [-c=<credentials>]...
       -r=<realms> [-r=<realms>]...
Bootstraps realms and principal credentials.

>   -c, --credential=<credentials>

Reviewer: suggestion: we should probably support reading secrets from the shell console and/or env. variables and/or files (as a follow-up PR)

Author: Yeah, the tools is currently extremely rudimentary at this point. The idea of reading from stdin or file is excellent.

                         Principal credentials to bootstrap. Must be of the

>                            form 'realm,clientId,clientSecret'.

Reviewer: `realm` has a dedicated option `-r` :thinking:  does the value have to repeat it? It looks off from the usability perspective.

Reviewer: I think it's usable :) and it's better to document a usable tool with rough edges, than not have a doc at all :)

  -h, --help             Show this help message and exit.

>   -r, --realm=<realms>   The name of a realm to bootstrap.

Reviewer: nit: `realms` (plural) looks odd as a placeholder for a singular option.

Author: Need to look into picocli options to fix this.

Reviewer: Looks like this is fixed in the latest commit, right?

Author: Whoops yes, pushed one more commit.

  -V, --version          Print version information and exit.
```

For example, to bootstrap the `realm1` realm and create its root principal credential with the
client ID `admin` and client secret `admin`, you can run the following command:

```shell
java -jar quarkus/admin/build/polaris-quarkus-admin-*-runner.jar bootstrap -r realm1 -c realm1,admin,admin
```

## Purging Principal Credentials

> The `purge` command is used to remove realms and principal credentials from the Polaris server. This

Reviewer: Shall we mention "realms" in the section title too? Could you add a paragraph on the implications of purging a realm?

---
#
# Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
# or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
# distributed with this work for additional information
# regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
# to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
# "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
# with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
# software distributed under the License is distributed on an
# "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
# KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
# specific language governing permissions and limitations
# under the License.
#
linkTitle: Polaris Admin Tool
title: Apache Polaris (incubating) Admin Tool
type: docs
weight: 300
---

> In order to help administrators manage their Polaris database, Polaris provides an administration

Reviewer 2: Can we be consistent with the name?
```suggestion
In order to help administrators manage their Polaris metastore, Polaris provides an administration
```

tool.

> The tool is built using [Quarkus](https://quarkus.io/).

Reviewer 2: Nit: do we need to call it out explicitly?

Reviewer 2: I just wanted to double-check if this is truly necessary. Typically, users don’t need to know the inner workings of a tool, especially since this document already explicitly states that configurations should remain consistent. Plus, there are a bunch of technologies behind it, we don't want to enumerate all of them. That said, it’s not a blocker, and I’m fine with proceeding either way.

Author: Let's remove, I think it's pretty obvious already that Quarkus is being used.

## How to Download the Admin Tool

> As of January 2025, there is currently no binary release or official Docker image available for
> the tool. For now, you need to build the artifacts yourself, for example, by running the following
> command:

Reviewer 2: I think it makes sense to use a matched version for both polaris server and admin tool, even after the binary release. In that case, if a user/developer is using the main branch, they should compile the admin tool anyway.
```suggestion
Make sure the admin tool and Polaris server are with the same version. If you are using Polaris from the source code, you need to build the artifacts yourself by running the following command:
```

Author: I'll apply the suggestion, but for the record, while it is definitely better if server and tool have the exact same version, that is not a hard requirement. What needs to match is the metastore/database schema.

```shell
./gradlew :polaris-quarkus-admin:build -Dquarkus.container-image.build=true
```

The above command will generate:

- One standalone JAR in `quarkus/admin/build/polaris-quarkus-admin-*-runner.jar`
- Two distribution archives in `quarkus/admin/build/distributions`
- Two Docker image named `apache/polaris-admin-tool:latest` and `apache/polaris-admin-tool:<version>`

## Usage

To run the standalone JAR, use the following command:

```shell
java -jar quarkus/admin/build/polaris-quarkus-admin-*-runner.jar --help
```

To unpack and run the distribution, you can use the following command:

```shell
cd quarkus/admin/build/distributions
unzip polaris-quarkus-admin-*.zip
cd polaris-quarkus-admin-*/
java -jar polaris-quarkus-admin-*-runner.jar --help

> ```

Reviewer 2: Do we need this unpack instruction? I'd prefer to leave for users/developers to figure it out by themselves if they want to do this.
